[release] merging release-2021-06-22 into master (#240)
gtk-rs/gtk-rs.github.io: _posts/2021-06-22-new-release.md

---
layout: post
author: Guillaume Gomez
title: Here comes the 4
categories: [front, crates]
date: 2021-06-22 21:00:00 +0000
---

It's been a long time since the last release, and, as you can guess, a lot of things happened in
this span of time. Let's start with the most important one:

**gtk-rs now provides bindings for GTK4 libraries!**

They are all available in the [gtk4-rs](https://github.com/gtk-rs/gtk4-rs)
repository.

We also wrote an "introductory book" to teach users how to use gtk4-rs. You can read it

> [here](https://gtk-rs.org/gtk4-rs/stable/latest/book/).

Reviewer: Maybe add a sentence here that a more detailed blog post will follow in the next days :)

Author: Ok!

## New website and new logo

We used this occasion to completely re-design the website and also make a logo. Since you're already
here, don't hesitate to go take a look around!

## GNOME Circle

**gtk-rs** is now part of the [GNOME Circle](https://circle.gnome.org/)! It allows our contributors
to join the GNOME foundation if they want to.

## Repositories changes

> This release also saw changes to the gtk-rs repositories structure. We now have three main

Reviewer 2: Maybe also explain the version jumps to sync versions

Author: Oh good point!

repositories:

 * [gtk-rs-core][gtk-rs-core]: It contains crates which are considered "core" because they are used
   by both GTK3 and GTK4, but also by other projects such as [gstreamer-rs][gstreamer-rs]:
   * cairo
   * gdk-pixbuf
   * gio
   * glib
   * glib-macros
   * graphene
   * pango
   * pangocairo
 * [gtk3-rs][gtk3-rs]: Contains crates which are part of the GTK3 ecosystem:
   * atk
   * gdk
   * gdkx11
   * gtk3-macros
 * [gtk4-rs][gtk4-rs]: Contains crates which are part of the GTK4 ecosystem:
   * gdk4
   * gdk4-wayland
   * gdk4-x11
   * gsk4
   * gtk4
   * gtk4-macros

## Documentation improvements

**gtk-rs** crates use the C documentation, however we improved its rendering a bit to make it even
more useful for Rust developers:

 * The items' links are now correctly generated.
 * Code examples have warnings in case this is not Rust code so it's not confusing.
 * We added doc aliases, so you can now search signal names and even C function names directly.

## Migration to the 2018 edition

The gtk-rs crates all migrated to the 2018 edition (just in time because the 2021 edition is getting
close!).

## Naming improvements

> We renamed a lot of functions/methods in order to make them more rust-compliant. On this note:

Reviewer: Maybe add: "Specifically, getter functions were renamed from `get_something()` to just `something()` while the setters stayed as `set_something()` and GObject property getters/setters lost their property designation from the name (i.e. `set_property_something()` -> `set_something()`)".

Reviewer 2: or

>  to just `something()` or `is_something()`

maybe

Author: I took both suggestions, thanks!

---
layout: post
author: Guillaume Gomez
title: Here comes the 4
categories: [front, crates]
date: 2021-06-22 21:00:00 +0000
---

It's been a long time since the last release, and, as you can guess, a lot of things happened in
this span of time. Let's start with the most important one:

**gtk-rs now provides bindings for GTK4 libraries!**

They are all available in the [gtk4-rs](https://github.com/gtk-rs/gtk4-rs) repository.

> We also wrote an "introductory book" to teach users how to use gtk4-rs. You can read it

Reviewer 3: This makes the assumption of the book being already completely ready which is not the case. not sure how to rephrase it though

Author: Any suggestion is welcome. Any idea @sdroege ?

Reviewer: > We also started writing an introductory book to teach users ...

Just that maybe?

Author: Done!

property designation from the name (i.e. `set_property_something()` was replaced by
`set_something()`).

On this note:

## The `Value` trait was refactored

The main change is that for non-nullable types `Value::get()` will never ever return `None`,
replacing the previous confusing `Value::get_some()`.

In addition it is now possible to `Value::get()` a nullable type directly without `Option`
wrapping. If the value was actually `None` this would return an `Err`.

There is also a new generic `ValueType` trait that is implemented by all types that can be used
inside a `Value` and that allows storing/retrieving types of this value into/from a `Value`.

### Note to applications developers

Applications developers should use [`fix-getters-calls`](https://crates.io/crates/fix-getters-calls)
to ease migration of their applications. Use [`fix-getters-def`](https://crates.io/crates/fix-getters-def)
if you also want your get functions definition to comply with the API standards applied in this
release.

## Migration to the 2018 edition

The gtk-rs crates all migrated to the 2018 edition (just in time because the 2021 edition is getting
close!).

> 

Reviewer 3: Mention that the GIR tutorial has been moved to a work in progress mdbook

Author: Done!

## Repositories changes

This release also saw changes to the gtk-rs repositories structure. We now have three main
repositories:

 * [gtk-rs-core][gtk-rs-core]: It contains crates which are considered "core" because they are used
   by both GTK3 and GTK4, but also by other projects such as [gstreamer-rs][gstreamer-rs]:
   * cairo
   * gdk-pixbuf
   * gio
   * glib
   * glib-macros
   * graphene
   * pango
   * pangocairo
 * [gtk3-rs][gtk3-rs]: Contains crates which are part of the GTK3 ecosystem:
   * atk
   * gdk
   * gdkx11
   * gtk3-macros
 * [gtk4-rs][gtk4-rs]: Contains crates which are part of the GTK4 ecosystem:
   * gdk4
   * gdk4-wayland
   * gdk4-x11
   * gsk4
   * gtk4
   * gtk4-macros

Another important point about this: now all crates in one repository share the same version number.
Before it was a bit of a mess so we decided to simplify it. So here is the version number by
repositories:

 * [gtk-rs-core][gtk-rs-core]: 0.14
 * [gtk3-rs][gtk3-rs]: 0.14
 * [gtk4-rs][gtk4-rs]: 0.1

## Documentation improvements

**gtk-rs** crates use the C documentation, however we improved its rendering a bit to make it even
more useful for Rust developers:

>  * The items' links are now correctly generated.

Reviewer 3: It would be nice to mention that we are trying to make use of as much as possible of the C documentations: we now document global functions, builder patterns, constants/statics. We also automatically ignore C specific parameters documentations as they are not used directly in the Rust API.

Author: Done!

 * Code examples have warnings in case this is not Rust code so it's not confusing.
 * We added doc aliases, so you can now search signal names and even C function names directly.

## Dependencies are reexported

Instead of a long explanation, let's take an example. You have a GTK application and you also use
Cairo and GDK. Before this release, you would add all the 3 dependencies to your `Cargo.toml` file
to be able to use them. Now, you only need to import GTK and then you can do:

```rust
use gtk::{cairo, gdk};
```

> And that's it! It'll make your management of dependencies much simpler.

Reviewer 3: Maybe also mention that also gtk's prelude re-exports gdk, pango and all gtk's dependencies preludes. So you can just do `use gtk::prelude::*` or `gtk::subclass::prelude::*` and you're ready to go. Instead of say `use gtk::prelude::*; use gio::prelude::*;`...

Author: Oh good idea.

want to generate your own GObject-based crate bindings, you can use it as well! To help you, we
start a tutorial book available [here](https://gtk-rs.org/gir/book/).

## Naming improvements

We renamed a lot of functions/methods in order to make them more rust-compliant. Specifically,
getter functions were renamed from `get_something()` to just `something()` or `is_something()`
while the setters stayed as `set_something()` and GObject property getters/setters lost their
property designation from the name (i.e. `set_property_something()` was replaced by
`set_something()`).

On this note:

### Note to applications developers

Applications developers should use [`fix-getters-calls`](https://crates.io/crates/fix-getters-calls)
to ease migration of their applications. Use [`fix-getters-def`](https://crates.io/crates/fix-getters-def)
if you also want your get functions definition to comply with the API standards applied in this
release.

## Minimum supported versions

**Rust** minimum supported version is now **1.51**.

ATK: 2.18
Cairo: 1.14
GDK: 3.18
GDKX11: 3.18
GDK-Pixbuf: 2.32
Gio: 2.48
GLib: 2.48
Graphene: 1.10

> GTK: 3.20

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
GTK3: 3.20
```

Reviewer 3: or maybe use crate names actually?

Reviewer: Also add GTK4 here (4.0)

Author: What's the point of adding the 4 crates? They're all at the `*.0` level.

Author: Oh well, gonna put them so it's done.

Reviewer: Completeness :) You can be sure that people otherwise will ask

---
layout: post
author: Guillaume Gomez
title: Here comes the 4
categories: [front, crates]
date: 2021-06-22 21:00:00 +0000
---

It's been a long time since the last release, and, as you can guess, a lot of things happened in
this span of time. Let's start with the most important one:

**gtk-rs now provides bindings for GTK4 libraries!**

They are all available in the [gtk4-rs](https://github.com/gtk-rs/gtk4-rs) repository.

We also wrote an "introductory book" to teach users how to use gtk4-rs. You can read it
[here](https://gtk-rs.org/gtk4-rs/stable/latest/book/). A more detailed blog post about GTK4 will
follow in the next days.

## New website and new logo

We used this occasion to completely re-design the website and also make a logo. Since you're already
here, don't hesitate to go take a look around!

## GNOME Circle

**gtk-rs** is now part of the [GNOME Circle](https://circle.gnome.org/)! It allows our contributors

> to join the GNOME foundation if they want to.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
to join the GNOME foundation if they want to in addition to some other benefits. Check the website for details.
```

## Repositories changes

This release also saw changes to the gtk-rs repositories structure. We now have three main
repositories:

 * [gtk-rs-core][gtk-rs-core]: It contains crates which are considered "core" because they are used
   by both GTK3 and GTK4, but also by other projects such as [gstreamer-rs][gstreamer-rs]:
   * cairo
   * gdk-pixbuf
   * gio
   * glib
   * glib-macros
   * graphene
   * pango
   * pangocairo
 * [gtk3-rs][gtk3-rs]: Contains crates which are part of the GTK3 ecosystem:
   * atk
   * gdk
   * gdkx11
   * gtk3-macros
 * [gtk4-rs][gtk4-rs]: Contains crates which are part of the GTK4 ecosystem:
   * gdk4
   * gdk4-wayland
   * gdk4-x11
   * gsk4
   * gtk4
   * gtk4-macros

Another important point about this: now all crates in one repository share the same version number.
Before it was a bit of a mess so we decided to simplify it. So here is the version number by

> repositories:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
repository:
```

 * [gtk-rs-core][gtk-rs-core]: 0.14
 * [gtk3-rs][gtk3-rs]: 0.14
 * [gtk4-rs][gtk4-rs]: 0.1

## Documentation improvements

**gtk-rs** crates use the C documentation, however we improved its rendering a bit to make it even
more useful for Rust developers:

 * The items' links are now correctly generated.
 * Code examples have warnings in case this is not Rust code so it's not confusing.
 * We added doc aliases, so you can now search signal names and even C function names directly.
 * Global functions, builder patterns, constants and statics are now documented as well.
 * C specific arguments (not used in the Rust bindings) are not rendered anymore.

> ## Dependencies are reexported

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Dependencies are re-exported
```

Instead of a long explanation, let's take an example. You have a GTK application and you also use
Cairo and GDK. Before this release, you would add all the 3 dependencies to your `Cargo.toml` file
to be able to use them. Now, you only need to import GTK and then you can do:

```rust
use gtk::{cairo, gdk};
```

And that's it! It'll make your management of dependencies much simpler. To be noted, they are also
in the `prelude`, so importing it will give you access to them:

```rust
use gtk::prelude::*;

// ...
let x = cairo::something();
let y = gdk::something();
```

> 

Reviewer: Also each crate is now re-exporting its corresponding -sys crate, e.g. `gtk-sys` is re-exported as `gtk::ffi` from the `gtk` crate.

## The `Value` trait was refactored

The main change is that for non-nullable types `Value::get()` will never ever return `None`,
replacing the previous confusing `Value::get_some()`.

In addition it is now possible to `Value::get()` a nullable type directly without `Option`

> wrapping. If the value was actually `None` this would return an `Err`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
wrapping. If the value was actually `None` this would return an `Err`. In cases where the value being `None` was unexpected this avoids one layer of unwrapping.
```

There is also a new generic `ValueType` trait that is implemented by all types that can be used
inside a `Value` and that allows storing/retrieving types of this value into/from a `Value`.

> ## Added composite templates

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Added GTK composite template support
```

For constructing widgets from a UI file, you can either using `gtk::Builder` or composite templates.
With the former, you have to keep an instance of `gtk::Builder` around. While with composite
templates, you make your custom widget (a subclass of `gtk::Widget`) use the template internally and
with the difference of being able to use your `CustomWidget` in a different UI file by defining:

```xml
<object class="CustomWidget">
  <property name="some-property">some-value</property>
</object>
```

You can now make your `CustomWidget` uses the `#[CompositeTemplate]` derive macro. The work was done
initially for GTK 4 rust bindings, but was backported to GTK 3 as well. See
[here](https://gtk-rs.org/gtk4-rs/stable/latest/docs/gtk4_macros/derive.CompositeTemplate.html) for

> an example.

Reviewer: And maybe a link to https://github.com/gtk-rs/gtk4-rs/tree/0.1/examples/composite_template ?

Composite templates also allow you to use methods defined on your `CustomWidget` as a callback to a
signal directly from the UI file, even though the macro doesn't support that for now for both

> GTK3/GTK4 bindings...

Reviewer: Link to https://github.com/gtk-rs/gtk3-rs/issues/128

## Gir tutorial

**gtk-rs** crates are mostly generated automatically thanks to the [gir][gir] project. If you also
want to generate your own GObject-based crate bindings, you can use it as well! To help you, we

> start a tutorial book available [here](https://gtk-rs.org/gir/book/).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
started a tutorial book that is available [here](https://gtk-rs.org/gir/book/).
```

## Naming improvements

> We renamed a lot of functions/methods in order to make them more rust-compliant. Specifically,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We renamed a lot of functions/methods in order to make them more Rust-compliant. Specifically,
```

getter functions were renamed from `get_something()` to just `something()` or `is_something()`

> while the setters stayed as `set_something()` and GObject property getters/setters lost their

Reviewer: ```suggestion
while the setters stayed as `set_something()`. In addition GObject property getters/setters lost their
```

property designation from the name (i.e. `set_property_something()` was replaced by
`set_something()`).

On this note:

### Note to applications developers

Applications developers should use [`fix-getters-calls`](https://crates.io/crates/fix-getters-calls)
to ease migration of their applications. Use [`fix-getters-def`](https://crates.io/crates/fix-getters-def)
if you also want your get functions definition to comply with the API standards applied in this
release.

## Minimum supported versions

**Rust** minimum supported version is now **1.51**.

ATK: 2.18
Cairo: 1.14
GDK3: 3.18
GDK4: 4.0
GDK4-Wayland: 4.0
GDKX11: 3.18
GDK4-X11: 4.0
GDK-Pixbuf: 2.32
Gio: 2.48
GLib: 2.48
Graphene: 1.10
GSK4: 4.0
GTK3: 3.20
GTK4: 4.0
Pango: 1.38
PangoCairo: 1.38

> ## Migration to the 2018 edition

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Migration to the Rust 2018 edition
```

The gtk-rs crates all migrated to the 2018 edition (just in time because the 2021 edition is getting

> close!).

Reviewer: Maybe remove the parenthesis and put a `.` in between instead.

---
layout: post
author: Guillaume Gomez
title: Here comes the 4
categories: [front, crates]
date: 2021-06-22 21:00:00 +0000
---

> * Write intro here *

Reviewer 3: Remind to not forget about https://github.com/gtk-rs/gtk-rs.github.io/issues/202

> ### Changes

Reviewer: Also a paragraph about the new website

> 

Reviewer: Also mention GNOME Circle

For the interested ones, here is the list of the merged pull requests:

> [gtk-rs-core](https://github.com/gtk-rs/gtk-rs-core):

Reviewer: I think you're missing all the PRs from the old separate repos before the unification

Reviewer: And from those would come various other paragraphs that would be useful to mention

 * [Update CI](https://github.com/gtk-rs/gtk-rs-core/pull/1)
 * [translate/TryFromGlib: add shortcut func.](https://github.com/gtk-rs/gtk-rs-core/pull/3)
 * [Fix typo in function name](https://github.com/gtk-rs/gtk-rs-core/pull/56)
 * [gio: Only assign to `GError\*\*`s if they're not `NULL`](https://github.com/gtk-rs/gtk-rs-core/pull/58)
 * [glib: Mark various Variant getter functions correctly as (transfer fu…](https://github.com/gtk-rs/gtk-rs-core/pull/59)
 * [glib: Fix leaks in FromGlibContainer impls for GString](https://github.com/gtk-rs/gtk-rs-core/pull/60)

>  * [readme: it's gtk-rs-core now](https://github.com/gtk-rs/gtk-rs-core/pull/62)

Reviewer: Should include a paragraph somewhere to explain the way the repos are split up now

 * [translate: make try\_from\_glib unsafe](https://github.com/gtk-rs/gtk-rs-core/pull/84)
 * [Add missing doc aliases](https://github.com/gtk-rs/gtk-rs-core/pull/83)
 * [Add doc alias check](https://github.com/gtk-rs/gtk-rs-core/pull/86)
 * [Don't revert diff](https://github.com/gtk-rs/gtk-rs-core/pull/87)
 * [Add missing doc aliases on variants](https://github.com/gtk-rs/gtk-rs-core/pull/91)
 * [Manually bind g\_win32\_get\_package\_installation\_directory\_of\_module](https://github.com/gtk-rs/gtk-rs-core/pull/90)
 * [Add more doc aliases on variants](https://github.com/gtk-rs/gtk-rs-core/pull/92)
 * [regen with latest gir](https://github.com/gtk-rs/gtk-rs-core/pull/94)
 * [glib: Allow creating Variants from slices instead of just Vecs](https://github.com/gtk-rs/gtk-rs-core/pull/96)
 * [Add missing binding for pango::Attribute::new\_shape](https://github.com/gtk-rs/gtk-rs-core/pull/99)
 * [Remove tmp emacs files](https://github.com/gtk-rs/gtk-rs-core/pull/101)
 * [Update crates version](https://github.com/gtk-rs/gtk-rs-core/pull/102)
 * [Expose the type of pango::Attribute](https://github.com/gtk-rs/gtk-rs-core/pull/104)

>  * [glib: add a doc alias for GType](https://github.com/gtk-rs/gtk-rs-core/pull/105)

Reviewer: Should add something about the improved docs in general and the doc aliases

 * [glib-macros: remove KNOWN\_GLIB\_EXPORTS](https://github.com/gtk-rs/gtk-rs-core/pull/132)
 * [Rename project to "gtk-rs"](https://github.com/gtk-rs/gtk-rs-core/pull/133)
 * [Add more issues templates](https://github.com/gtk-rs/gtk-rs-core/pull/134)
 * [Let cancellable be passed into GioFuture instead of creating it by the closure](https://github.com/gtk-rs/gtk-rs-core/pull/136)
 * [glib: Duplicate some ObjectClass methods to Interface](https://github.com/gtk-rs/gtk-rs-core/pull/135)
 * [Add missing information for glib clone macro](https://github.com/gtk-rs/gtk-rs-core/pull/137)
 * [CI: set gtk-rs logo for rust docs](https://github.com/gtk-rs/gtk-rs-core/pull/138)
 * [image: pre-install wget](https://github.com/gtk-rs/gtk-rs-core/pull/140)
 * [CI: use apt instead of dnf](https://github.com/gtk-rs/gtk-rs-core/pull/139)
 * [CI: update image job](https://github.com/gtk-rs/gtk-rs-core/pull/141)
 * [CI: use the core image](https://github.com/gtk-rs/gtk-rs-core/pull/142)
 * [\[regen\] Fix duplicate doc aliases](https://github.com/gtk-rs/gtk-rs-core/pull/143)
 * [glib: typo fix](https://github.com/gtk-rs/gtk-rs-core/pull/144)

>  * [glib: implement Clone on SourceId](https://github.com/gtk-rs/gtk-rs-core/pull/148)

Reviewer: This has the wrong title. It adds docs, does not implement `Clone`

 * [Fix clippy warnings](https://github.com/gtk-rs/gtk-rs-core/pull/149)
 * [regen with latest gir](https://github.com/gtk-rs/gtk-rs-core/pull/150)
 * [misc: update docs links & repos links](https://github.com/gtk-rs/gtk-rs-core/pull/151)

> [gtk3-rs](https://github.com/gtk-rs/gtk3-rs):

Reviewer: Should also add a paragraph about the initial gtk4 bindings release

Reviewer: And mention the book

Author: Done!

 * [Add gio::TlsBackend](https://github.com/gtk-rs/gtk3-rs/pull/9)
 * [Update lib.rs](https://github.com/gtk-rs/gtk3-rs/pull/7)
 * [glib/functions: fix get\_charset logic](https://github.com/gtk-rs/gtk3-rs/pull/8)
 * [glib-macros: Use absolute paths to the StaticType trait](https://github.com/gtk-rs/gtk3-rs/pull/12)
 * [CI: add a simple github action](https://github.com/gtk-rs/gtk3-rs/pull/2)
 * [Use `Object&lt;T&gt;::as\_mut()` without unsafe, and a couple other small things](https://github.com/gtk-rs/gtk3-rs/pull/16)
 * [glib/translate: take advantage of Rust Option & Result types](https://github.com/gtk-rs/gtk3-rs/pull/11)
 * [Improve generator.py script to make CI job easier](https://github.com/gtk-rs/gtk3-rs/pull/18)
 * [Fix generator func name](https://github.com/gtk-rs/gtk3-rs/pull/21)
 * [Add option to not run `cargo fmt`](https://github.com/gtk-rs/gtk3-rs/pull/22)
 * [Various minor cleanups](https://github.com/gtk-rs/gtk3-rs/pull/23)
 * [cairo: Update to system-deps 2.0 like everything else](https://github.com/gtk-rs/gtk3-rs/pull/25)
 * [Fix entry\_completion quit shortcut](https://github.com/gtk-rs/gtk3-rs/pull/33)

>  * [Move to edition "2018"](https://github.com/gtk-rs/gtk3-rs/pull/32)

Reviewer: This one should be mentioned

Author: Done!

 * [\[generator.py\] Use argparse and option for paths](https://github.com/gtk-rs/gtk3-rs/pull/169)
 * [Switch 2018](https://github.com/gtk-rs/gtk3-rs/pull/165)
 * [Small doc examples cleanup](https://github.com/gtk-rs/gtk3-rs/pull/172)
 * [Improve naming](https://github.com/gtk-rs/gtk3-rs/pull/174)
 * [Removing python2 code](https://github.com/gtk-rs/gtk3-rs/pull/175)
 * [generator: Convert to pathlib, fix wrong path passed to various executables](https://github.com/gtk-rs/gtk3-rs/pull/170)
 * [generator: Autoformat and normalize quotation with `black`](https://github.com/gtk-rs/gtk3-rs/pull/176)
 * [glib::Binding improvements](https://github.com/gtk-rs/gtk3-rs/pull/179)
 * [Regen](https://github.com/gtk-rs/gtk3-rs/pull/180)
 * [Fix clone macro by allowing returned value with type parameters](https://github.com/gtk-rs/gtk3-rs/pull/184)
 * [gtk: backport fix compute\_expand vfunc](https://github.com/gtk-rs/gtk3-rs/pull/186)
 * [glib: implement FromGlibContainer for GString](https://github.com/gtk-rs/gtk3-rs/pull/181)
 * [Subclassing for GtkButton, backported from gtk4-rs](https://github.com/gtk-rs/gtk3-rs/pull/188)

>  * [Backport composite templates from gtk4-rs](https://github.com/gtk-rs/gtk3-rs/pull/189)

Reviewer: This one

Author: I have no idea what this is though. :-/

Reviewer 3: For constructing widgets from a UI file, you can either using `gtk::Builder` or composite templates. With the former, you have to keep an instance of `gtk::Builder` around. While with composite templates, you make your custom widget (a subclass of `gtk::Widget`) use the template internally and with the difference of being able to use your `CustomWidget` in a different UI file by defining 
```xml
<object class="CustomWidget">
  <property name="some-property">some-value</property>
</object>
```

Thanks to some awesome work from @BrainBlasted, you can now make your `CustomWidget` uses the `#[CompositeTemplate]` derive macro. The work was done initially for GTK 4 rust bindings, but was backported to GTK 3 as well. See https://gtk-rs.org/gtk4-rs/stable/latest/docs/gtk4_macros/derive.CompositeTemplate.html for an example. 

Composite templates also allows you to use methods defined on your `CustomWidget` as a callback to a signal directly from the UI file. The macro doesn't support that for now for both GTK3/GTK4 bindings.

Something along these lines?

Author: I'm not super confident about mentionning people specifically in release notes. Some might feel like they should have been mentionned too or equivalents. I didn't name anyone anywhere else for example. We have the full list of contributors at the end.

Reviewer 3: sure, you don't need to copy paste what i shared as is

Author: I edited it a bit (mostly removing the specific mention), but otherwise took it mostly as is. Thanks!

 * [add manual doc aliases](https://github.com/gtk-rs/gtk3-rs/pull/227)
 * [gio: add Windows stream types](https://github.com/gtk-rs/gtk3-rs/pull/255)
 * [A couple minor improvements](https://github.com/gtk-rs/gtk3-rs/pull/249)
 * [gtk: Implement Deref for TemplateChild](https://github.com/gtk-rs/gtk3-rs/pull/260)
 * [In glib\_object\_wrapper!, use generic Class type instead defining a struct](https://github.com/gtk-rs/gtk3-rs/pull/10)
 * [add ActionMap/ActionGroup subclassing support](https://github.com/gtk-rs/gtk3-rs/pull/257)
 * [Update various dependencies](https://github.com/gtk-rs/gtk3-rs/pull/264)
 * [gio: use default methods when possible for ActionGroup](https://github.com/gtk-rs/gtk3-rs/pull/263)
 * [examples: Use autobins](https://github.com/gtk-rs/gtk3-rs/pull/267)
 * [Add Dialog::run\_future()](https://github.com/gtk-rs/gtk3-rs/pull/268)
 * [gio: Add `glib-compile-resources` wrapper, and macro to include](https://github.com/gtk-rs/gtk3-rs/pull/261)
 * [Doc checks](https://github.com/gtk-rs/gtk3-rs/pull/247)
 * [Subclassing refactoring](https://github.com/gtk-rs/gtk3-rs/pull/270)
 * [Implement StaticType on ()](https://github.com/gtk-rs/gtk3-rs/pull/272)

>  * [glib-macros: Make `GBoxed` not require importing `BoxedType`](https://github.com/gtk-rs/gtk3-rs/pull/275)

Reviewer: Should add a paragraph about all the derive/attribute macros we have now, also the gtk3-macros

Author: Same, I didn't follow this topic so I have absolutely no idea how it works.

Author: Anyone for a paragraph here? :)

Reviewer: In addition to the `glib::object_subclass` attribute macro (see link to paragraph about subclassing improvements), `glib` provides a couple of other macros now for making application development easier and with less boilerplate:

 * `glib::clone!` (link to docs): This macro allows automatic cloning or creation of weak references plus upgrading for closures and greatly simplifies creation of signal handler closures. See the documentation contains a couple of examples. While this macro existed in the last release already, it was completely rewritten and made more powerful and got a companion `derive` macro `glib::Downgrade` (link to docs) that extends custom types with the required machinery to be used for weak references in the context of the `clone!` macro.
 * `glib::GBoxed` and `glib::GSharedBoxed` (links to docs): These derive macros allow using custom Rust types inside `glib::Value`s, which is required for example for GObject properties and signal parameters/return values or the content of GTK tree views. The first macro always clones the underlying value when necessary while the second makes use of reference counting instead of normal cloning.
 * `glib::gflags!` and `glib::GEnum` (links to docs): These macros allow using Rust enums and [bitflags](https://docs.rs/bitflags) to be used inside `glib::Value`s. See the [subclassing docs](https://gtk-rs.org/gtk-rs-core/stable/0.14/docs/glib/subclass/index.html#example-for-registering-a-glibobject-subclass) for examples.
 * `glib::GErrorDomain` (link to docs): This derive macro allows using a suitable Rust enum to be used as an error domain for `glib::Error`s.

See also the [subclassing docs](https://gtk-rs.org/gtk-rs-core/stable/0.14/docs/glib/subclass/index.html#example-for-registering-a-glibobject-subclass) for more examples about the `glib::GBoxed`, `glib::gflags` and `glib::GEnum` macros.

 * [glib: Improve the API of Type](https://github.com/gtk-rs/gtk3-rs/pull/318)
 * [glib-macros: Forward the visibility of the type into the code generat…](https://github.com/gtk-rs/gtk3-rs/pull/321)
 * [ connect\_unsafe: Refactor, then don't ignore the return\_type for null objects ](https://github.com/gtk-rs/gtk3-rs/pull/319)
 * [Make virtual methods take wrapper of type, not parent](https://github.com/gtk-rs/gtk3-rs/pull/27)
 * [CI: docs generate index page and bump peaceiris/actions-gh-pages](https://github.com/gtk-rs/gtk3-rs/pull/323)
 * [gtk: use "assertion" = "skip" instead of manual implementation](https://github.com/gtk-rs/gtk3-rs/pull/327)
 * [API changes due to signal-detail PR to gir](https://github.com/gtk-rs/gtk3-rs/pull/324)
 * [Implement ListBoxRowImplExt for activate method](https://github.com/gtk-rs/gtk3-rs/pull/331)
 * [gtk: Add `enter\_notify\_event` and `leave\_notify\_event` to `WidgetImpl`](https://github.com/gtk-rs/gtk3-rs/pull/334)
 * [glib: `#\[object\_subclass\]` proc macro.](https://github.com/gtk-rs/gtk3-rs/pull/335)
 * [CI: add a docker image](https://github.com/gtk-rs/gtk3-rs/pull/339)

>  * [Subclass cleanup](https://github.com/gtk-rs/gtk3-rs/pull/337)

Reviewer: Not this one specifically, but generally a paragraph about all the subclassing changes

Author: Didn't follow either.

Author: Anyone for a paragraph here? :)

Reviewer 3: Maybe we can show the example of how to create a simple custom gobject using the 0.10 release and 0.14 one?

Reviewer: Good idea. Just the basic example from the docs without properties/signals maybe? Or even with a property?

Reviewer 3: before: https://gtk-rs.org/gtk-rs-core/stable/0.10/docs/glib/subclass/index.html#example-for-registering-a-glibobject-subclass
after: https://gtk-rs.org/gtk-rs-core/stable/latest/docs/glib/subclass/index.html#example-for-registering-a-glibobject-subclass

and yes with a single property would be nicer

Author: That's far too long for a blog post. XD

Reviewer 3: You can just link to the old/new way of things, to show off the new versioned docs :p

Author: I honestly don't know how to explain that in a few lines. That seems like something that should be put in a blog post on its own... Also, even though I see the difference, I don't know what it implies as I have never used this. :-/

Reviewer 4: Implementing a `GObject` is simpler, thanks to the introduction of the `#[glib::object_subclass]` procedural macro. Additionally registering properties and signals now requires less boiler plate. Refer to https://gtk-rs.org/gtk-rs-core/stable/latest/docs/glib/subclass/index.html#example-for-registering-a-glibobject-subclass for an example.

Reviewer: Sounds good to me

Reviewer: Also link to the macro docs in addition https://gtk-rs.org/gtk-rs-core/stable/0.14/docs/glib_macros/attr.object_subclass.html

 * [glib: Move `type\_data()` and `get\_type()` to new `unsafe trait`](https://github.com/gtk-rs/gtk3-rs/pull/338)
 * [cairo: add doc aliases round 1](https://github.com/gtk-rs/gtk3-rs/pull/343)
 * [object: Return a pointer from get\_qdata, not a reference](https://github.com/gtk-rs/gtk3-rs/pull/344)
 * [Store class\_data/instance\_data hashmaps directly instead of boxing an…](https://github.com/gtk-rs/gtk3-rs/pull/345)
 * [glib: Add \_once variants to many methods](https://github.com/gtk-rs/gtk3-rs/pull/349)
 * [glib: add ObjectExt::connect\_id & other variants](https://github.com/gtk-rs/gtk3-rs/pull/350)
 * [glib: Distinguish between classes and interfaces at the type level](https://github.com/gtk-rs/gtk3-rs/pull/352)
 * [Add support for chaining up to parent interface implementations](https://github.com/gtk-rs/gtk3-rs/pull/353)
 * [glib: Fix compilation of listbox\_model example](https://github.com/gtk-rs/gtk3-rs/pull/355)
 * [Make `drag-motion` and `drag-drop` signals return `bool` instead of `Inhibit`](https://github.com/gtk-rs/gtk3-rs/pull/361)
 * [Add support for async blocks in clone macro](https://github.com/gtk-rs/gtk3-rs/pull/362)

>  * [Update to GLib 2.68.0](https://github.com/gtk-rs/gtk3-rs/pull/364)

Reviewer: Paragraph about the latest versions we support

Author: which versions did we support before? I don't know where to find this information actually...

Reviewer: The features in the `Cargo.toml`s for the latest version, the min version in the `Gir.toml` for the minimum (or the version in the `build.rs` of the -sys crate)

Author: Oh that's smart.

 * [glib: Remove un-generatable type UriParamsIter](https://github.com/gtk-rs/gtk3-rs/pull/459)
 * [Return Options for new UnixMountEntry](https://github.com/gtk-rs/gtk3-rs/pull/461)
 * [\[docs\] Some changes to gtk intro](https://github.com/gtk-rs/gtk3-rs/pull/431)
 * [\[docs\] Some changes to glib intro](https://github.com/gtk-rs/gtk3-rs/pull/435)
 * [set minimal features for syn/futures crates](https://github.com/gtk-rs/gtk3-rs/pull/469)
 * [Remove 'work in progress' statements](https://github.com/gtk-rs/gtk3-rs/pull/470)
 * [Update to proc-macro-crate 1.0](https://github.com/gtk-rs/gtk3-rs/pull/466)
 * [glib-macros: Try harder to find glib](https://github.com/gtk-rs/gtk3-rs/pull/471)
 * [glib: Only allow canonical names in property and signal builders](https://github.com/gtk-rs/gtk3-rs/pull/416)
 * [Get removal round 2](https://github.com/gtk-rs/gtk3-rs/pull/455)
 * [glib: bind g\_signal\_has\_handler\_pending](https://github.com/gtk-rs/gtk3-rs/pull/475)
 * [list\_model: Rename object to item](https://github.com/gtk-rs/gtk3-rs/pull/479)
 * [gio: rename spawnv to plain spawn](https://github.com/gtk-rs/gtk3-rs/pull/481)

>  * [Value trait refactoring](https://github.com/gtk-rs/gtk3-rs/pull/454)

Reviewer: This one

Author: Anyone for a paragraph here? :)

Reviewer: You already wrote about this one. "The `Value` trait was refactored"

 * [gio: Rename TlsConnectionManualExt to ExtManual and export from prelude](https://github.com/gtk-rs/gtk3-rs/pull/483)
 * [GH workflows: Use actions-rs/toolchain `components` to install clippy](https://github.com/gtk-rs/gtk3-rs/pull/485)
 * [glib/value: impl StaticType for Option&lt;T&gt; when applicable](https://github.com/gtk-rs/gtk3-rs/pull/484)
 * [glib: manually bind g\_unix\_open\_pipe](https://github.com/gtk-rs/gtk3-rs/pull/488)
 * [Don't re-export traits from crate root](https://github.com/gtk-rs/gtk3-rs/pull/487)
 * [ToGlib should take Self](https://github.com/gtk-rs/gtk3-rs/pull/427)
 * [Impl IntoGlib for Result...](https://github.com/gtk-rs/gtk3-rs/pull/493)
 * [gtk: Add `WidgetClassSubclassExt::{css\_name,set\_css\_name}`](https://github.com/gtk-rs/gtk3-rs/pull/476)
 * [gtk: rename StyleContext::property to StyleContext::style\_property](https://github.com/gtk-rs/gtk3-rs/pull/495)
 * [Regen with latest gir](https://github.com/gtk-rs/gtk3-rs/pull/501)
 * [glib: `From` and `TryFrom` implementations for working with `Char`](https://github.com/gtk-rs/gtk3-rs/pull/494)
 * [Add rename doc aliases](https://github.com/gtk-rs/gtk3-rs/pull/490)

>  * [Make cairo error handling slightly better](https://github.com/gtk-rs/gtk3-rs/pull/498)

Reviewer: Maybe this @bilelmoussaoui ?

Author: Anyone for a paragraph here? :)

Reviewer 4: ```
Using cairo is now more ergonomic: functions like `fill()` or `stroke()` return a `Result` instead of requiring to manually check the `Context::status()`. Additionally, all internal calls to `expect()` on the cairo status were removed, enabling the caller to handle error conditions, rather than causing a `panic`.
```

---
layout: post
author: Guillaume Gomez
title: Here comes the 4
categories: [front, crates]
date: 2021-06-22 21:00:00 +0000
---

It's been a long time since the last release, and, as you can guess, a lot of things happened in
this span of time. Let's start with the most important one:

**gtk-rs now provides bindings for GTK4 libraries!**

They are all available in the [gtk4-rs](https://github.com/gtk-rs/gtk4-rs) repository.

> We also wrote an "introductory book" to teach users how to use gtk4-rs. You can read it

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
We also wrote an introductory book to teach users how to use gtk4-rs. You can read it
```
Maybe drop the quotes?

Author: :+1:

follow in the next days.

## New website and new logo

We used this occasion to completely re-design the website and also make a logo. Since you're already
here, don't hesitate to go take a look around!

## GNOME Circle

**gtk-rs** is now part of the [GNOME Circle](https://circle.gnome.org/)! It allows our contributors
to join the GNOME foundation if they want to in addition to some other benefits. Check the website
for more details.

## Repositories changes

This release also saw changes to the gtk-rs repositories structure. We now have three main
repositories:

 * [gtk-rs-core][gtk-rs-core]: It contains crates which are considered "core" because they are used
   by both GTK3 and GTK4, but also by other projects such as [gstreamer-rs][gstreamer-rs]:
   * cairo
   * gdk-pixbuf
   * gio
   * glib
   * glib-macros
   * graphene
   * pango
   * pangocairo
 * [gtk3-rs][gtk3-rs]: Contains crates which are part of the GTK3 ecosystem:
   * atk
   * gdk
   * gdkx11
   * gtk3-macros
 * [gtk4-rs][gtk4-rs]: Contains crates which are part of the GTK4 ecosystem:
   * gdk4
   * gdk4-wayland
   * gdk4-x11
   * gsk4
   * gtk4
   * gtk4-macros

> Another important point about this: now all crates in one repository share the same version number.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Another important point about this: all crates in one repository share the same version number now .
```

> Before it was a bit of a mess so we decided to simplify it. So here is the version number by
> repository:

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Before it was a bit of a mess so we decided to simplify it. So here are the version numbers for each repository:
```

 * [gtk-rs-core][gtk-rs-core]: 0.14
 * [gtk3-rs][gtk3-rs]: 0.14
 * [gtk4-rs][gtk4-rs]: 0.1

## Documentation improvements

**gtk-rs** crates use the C documentation, however we improved its rendering a bit to make it even
more useful for Rust developers:

 * The items' links are now correctly generated.

>  * Code examples have warnings in case this is not Rust code so it's not confusing.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
 * If code examples are not written in Rust, we now add warnings to avoid confusion.
```

 * We added doc aliases, so you can now search signal names and even C function names directly.
 * Global functions, builder patterns, constants and statics are now documented as well.

>  * C specific arguments (not used in the Rust bindings) are not rendered anymore.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
 * Arguments which are C specific and therefore not used in the Rust bindings are not rendered anymore.
```

## Dependencies are re-exported

Instead of a long explanation, let's take an example. You have a GTK application and you also use
Cairo and GDK. Before this release, you would add all the 3 dependencies to your `Cargo.toml` file
to be able to use them. Now, you only need to import GTK and then you can do:

```rust
use gtk::{cairo, gdk};
```

And that's it! It'll make your management of dependencies much simpler. To be noted, they are also
in the `prelude`, so importing it will give you access to them:

```rust
use gtk::prelude::*;

// ...
let x = cairo::something();
let y = gdk::something();
```

> Last import note about the re-exports: the `-sys` crates are also re-exported under the name `ffi`:

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Last note about the re-exports: the `-sys` crates are also re-exported under the name `ffi`:
```

> Last import note about the re-exports: the `-sys` crates are also re-exported under the name `ffi`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Last important note about the re-exports: the `-sys` crates are also re-exported under the name `ffi`:
```

```rust
use gtk::ffi;

// You now have access to all raw C-functions of GTK.
```

## The `Value` trait was refactored

The main change is that for non-nullable types `Value::get()` will never ever return `None`,
replacing the previous confusing `Value::get_some()`.

In addition it is now possible to `Value::get()` a nullable type directly without `Option`
wrapping. If the value was actually `None` this would return an `Err`. In cases where the value
being `None` was unexpected this avoids one layer of unwrapping.

There is also a new generic `ValueType` trait that is implemented by all types that can be used
inside a `Value` and that allows storing/retrieving types of this value into/from a `Value`.

## Added GTK composite template support

> For constructing widgets from a UI file, you can either using `gtk::Builder` or composite templates.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
For constructing widgets from a UI file, you can either use `gtk::Builder` or composite templates.
```

With the former, you have to keep an instance of `gtk::Builder` around. While with composite
templates, you make your custom widget (a subclass of `gtk::Widget`) use the template internally and
with the difference of being able to use your `CustomWidget` in a different UI file by defining:

```xml
<object class="CustomWidget">
  <property name="some-property">some-value</property>
</object>
```

> You can now make your `CustomWidget` uses the `#[CompositeTemplate]` derive macro. The work was done

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
You can now make your `CustomWidget` use the `#[CompositeTemplate]` derive macro. The work was done
```

> initially for GTK 4 rust bindings, but was backported to GTK 3 as well. See

Reviewer 6: It's just a bit confusing that it's sometimes written as "GTK4" and "GTK3" and then "GTK 4" and "GTK 3" and also "Rust" and then "rust".

Author: Good point, going through them.

Reviewer: Yes, let's unify that. `GTK4` (without space) and `Rust` (with capital R)

[here](https://gtk-rs.org/gtk4-rs/stable/0.1/docs/gtk4_macros/derive.CompositeTemplate.html) or
[here](https://github.com/gtk-rs/gtk4-rs/tree/0.1/examples/composite_template) for examples.

Composite templates also allow you to use methods defined on your `CustomWidget` as a callback to a
signal directly from the UI file, even though the macro doesn't support that for now for both
GTK3/GTK4 bindings... But don't worry, [we're working on it](https://github.com/gtk-rs/gtk3-rs/issues/128)!

> ## GBoxed doesn't require to import BoxedType anymore

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## New and improved macros
```

In addition to the `glib::object_subclass` attribute macro (see link to paragraph about subclassing
improvements), `glib` provides a couple of other macros now for making application development
easier and with less boilerplate:

>  * [`glib::clone!`](https://gtk-rs.org/gtk-rs-core/stable/0.14/docs/glib/macro.clone.html): This macro allows automatic cloning or creation of weak references plus upgrading for closures and greatly simplifies creation of signal handler closures. See the documentation contains a couple of examples. While this macro existed in the last release already, it was completely rewritten and made more powerful and got a companion `derive` macro [`glib::Downgrade`](https://gtk-rs.org/gtk-rs-core/stable/0.14/docs/glib_macros/derive.Downgrade.html) that extends custom types with the required machinery to be used for weak references in the context of the [`clone!`](https://gtk-rs.org/gtk-rs-core/stable/0.14/docs/glib/macro.clone.html) macro.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
 * [`glib::clone!`](https://gtk-rs.org/gtk-rs-core/stable/0.14/docs/glib/macro.clone.html): This macro allows automatic cloning or creation of weak references plus upgrading for closures and greatly simplifies creation of signal handler closures. The documentation contains a couple of examples. While this macro existed in the last release already, it was completely rewritten and made more powerful and got a companion `derive` macro [`glib::Downgrade`](https://gtk-rs.org/gtk-rs-core/stable/0.14/docs/glib_macros/derive.Downgrade.html) that extends custom types with the required machinery to be used for weak references in the context of the [`clone!`](https://gtk-rs.org/gtk-rs-core/stable/0.14/docs/glib/macro.clone.html) macro.
```

 * [`glib::GErrorDomain`](https://gtk-rs.org/gtk-rs-core/stable/0.14/docs/glib_macros/derive.GErrorDomain.html): This derive macro allows using a suitable Rust enum to be used as an error domain for [`glib::Error`](https://gtk-rs.org/gtk-rs-core/stable/0.14/docs/glib/error/struct.Error.html)s.

See also the [subclassing docs](https://gtk-rs.org/gtk-rs-core/stable/0.14/docs/glib/subclass/index.html#example-for-registering-a-glibobject-subclass) for more examples about the [`glib::GBoxed`](https://gtk-rs.org/gtk-rs-core/stable/0.14/docs/glib_macros/derive.GBoxed.html), [`glib::gflags`](https://gtk-rs.org/gtk-rs-core/stable/0.14/docs/glib_macros/attr.gflags.html) and [`glib::GEnum`](https://gtk-rs.org/gtk-rs-core/stable/0.14/docs/glib_macros/derive.GEnum.html) macros.

## Improvements to subclassing

> Implementing a GObject is simpler, thanks to the introduction of the [glib::object_subclass](https://gtk-rs.org/gtk-rs-core/stable/0.14/docs/glib_macros/attr.object_subclass.html) `derive` macro. Additionally registering properties and signals now requires less boiler plate. Refer to [this page](https://gtk-rs.org/gtk-rs-core/stable/0.14/docs/glib/subclass/index.html#example-for-registering-a-glibobject-subclass) for an example.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Implementing a GObject is simpler, thanks to the introduction of the [glib::object_subclass](https://gtk-rs.org/gtk-rs-core/stable/0.14/docs/glib_macros/attr.object_subclass.html) `derive` macro. Additionally registering properties and signals now requires less boiler plate. Refer to [this page](https://gtk-rs.org/gtk-rs-core/stable/0.14/docs/glib/subclass/index.html#example-for-registering-a-glibobject-subclass) for a complete example but a minimal example would look as follows now:

```rust
mod imp {
    #[derive(Default)]
    pub struct MyObject;
    
    #[glib::object_subclass]
    impl ObjectSubclass for SimpleObject {
        const NAME: &'static str = "MyObject";
        
        type Type = super::MyObject;
        type ParentType = glib::Object;
    }
    
    impl ObjectImpl for MyObject {}
}

glib::wrapper! {
    pub struct MyObject(ObjectSubclass<imp::MyObject>);
}

impl MyObject {
    pub fn new() -> Self {
        glib::Object::new(&[]).unwrap()
    }
}
```
```

See also the [subclassing docs](https://gtk-rs.org/gtk-rs-core/stable/0.14/docs/glib/subclass/index.html#example-for-registering-a-glibobject-subclass) for more examples about the [`glib::GBoxed`](https://gtk-rs.org/gtk-rs-core/stable/0.14/docs/glib_macros/derive.GBoxed.html), [`glib::gflags`](https://gtk-rs.org/gtk-rs-core/stable/0.14/docs/glib_macros/attr.gflags.html) and [`glib::GEnum`](https://gtk-rs.org/gtk-rs-core/stable/0.14/docs/glib_macros/derive.GEnum.html) macros.

## Improvements to subclassing

Implementing a GObject is simpler, thanks to the introduction of the [glib::object_subclass](https://gtk-rs.org/gtk-rs-core/stable/0.14/docs/glib_macros/attr.object_subclass.html) `derive` macro. Additionally registering properties and signals now requires less boiler plate. Refer to [this page](https://gtk-rs.org/gtk-rs-core/stable/0.14/docs/glib/subclass/index.html#example-for-registering-a-glibobject-subclass) for a complete example but a minimal example would look as follows now:

```rust
mod imp {
    #[derive(Default)]
    pub struct MyObject;

    #[glib::object_subclass]

>     impl ObjectSubclass for SimpleObject {

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    impl ObjectSubclass for MyObject {
```
